---
layout: page
title: Launch Virtual Machines Quickly with spinup
---

For a long time now, I've been using Vagrant to quickly launch a VM or
two when I need to. Recently, I've been less and less satisfied with
Vagrant. It's usually slow and needs editing the `Vagrantfile` if I
want to change the machine specs. The slowness might be partially due
to using VirtualBox by default. There is a vagrant-libvirt plugin that
lets you use libvirt/KVM but the plugin seems to be a hit-and-miss
affair and I've not been able to make it work all the time.

There is always the option of using `virsh` and other libvirt
utilities, of course, to launch VMs, but that is not as simple as I'd
like. I finally decided to write some sort of wrapper script for
libvirt and here it is: [spinup][1] --a simple utility to launch VMs
as fast as possible.

You need to clone the repository, run `prepare.sh` and you're set to
use `spinup`. I'll also assume that you've made a symlink to
`spinup.py` as `spinup` in an appropriate place, and installed the
dependencies, so that the utility is always easily available to
you. There's of course the option of installing dependencies in a
`virtualenv` and running `./spinup.py` from there. You will obviously
need `libvirtd` available, too.

The easiest way to launch a VM is by running this:

    $ spinup

This will create an Ubuntu based VM with 1GiB of RAM and one CPU core,
downloading the Ubuntu cloud image the first time you run it. To land
inside the VM, simply run:

    $ spinup ssh

The created VM is tied to the directory you create it in (although no
files are created in that directory). So you need to be in that
directory in order to have access to the VM.

In order to destroy the VM, simply run:

    $ spinup destroy

You can create a VM with different specs like this:

    $ spinup coreos 4G 2cpus

This will create a CoreOS based VM with 4GiB of RAM and two CPU cores.

It's also possible to launch multiple VMs at the same time:

    $ spinup :foo ubuntu 2G -- :bar coreos 4G 2cpus

Here we have created two VMs, naming them `foo` and `bar`
respectively. In order to ssh into `bar` simply run:

    $ spinup ssh bar

Running `spinup destroy` will destroy both VMs.

One area in which `spinup` is sorely lacking at the moment is
networking. The created VMs are connected to libvirt's default
network, but there are no other options. I'm hoping to fix this in the
near future.

`spinup` is in its very early stages of development, released in the
"release early, release often" spirit. If you have any questions, you
can send me an email at _mostafa(at)sepent.com_ or create an issue or
send a pull request over at [github][1].

[1]: https://github.com/elektito/spinup
